# Challenges and Social Justice Solutions Around Tokenism & the Lack of Black Representation in Senior Tech Roles
---

Parker Jessie

Howard University

Data 201

Dr. Symone Campbell

---

A February 2023 report by McKinsey’s Institute for Black Economic Mobility claimed businesses are at risk to lose billions of dollars if Black professionals continue to be underrepresented in tech jobs. Only 8 percent of employees in tech jobs are Black. Just 3 percent of technology executives in the C-suite are Black, and this gap is expected to widen over the next decade. In particular, this data refers to technology jobs in software development, cybersecurity, data science, and engineering. McKinsey reports that tech jobs are expected to grow up to 14 percent by 2032. However, Black tech talent in those roles is expected to grow only 8 percent over the same period (Brown, Finney, McMillan, & Perkins, 2023).
	There is a lack of Black representation in high-level tech jobs. A widespread conversation started around 2014 when companies started publishing diversity reports, revealing minimal Black representation within their workforces.  In response to the tragic death of George Floyd back in May of 2020, companies pledged to improve diversity and hire more Black professionals. However, tech jobs require hard skills which take a lot of time, learning, and experience to succeed. Without having an understanding of what these roles entail, companies risk setting up new hires for failure.
This approach creates tension with existing Black employees in senior roles who feel pressured to meet diversity goals. Black employees want to be an asset by helping companies meet diversity goals, but they also have to make sure they’re respected for their skills and not just hired to meet a quota. This issue highlights how race, career development, and tech careers intersect, where data science can offer guidance for building sustainable solutions. It is important for companies to focus on intersectionality, but it is equally important to think about the time and support it takes to foster meaningful diversity in tech. If companies fail to address these issues, this can lead to high turnover, burnout, and the stigma around tokenism, leading to an undermining of diversity efforts. How does the lack of Black representation in senior tech roles impact diversity efforts, and what can be done to fix this problem in a fair and thoughtful way? What social justice-minded solutions can address the barriers that Black professionals face in these positions?
	In the fall of 2020, I worked as a consultant at an agency that specializes in diversity, equity, and inclusion. I spent many hours on calls with employees from different companies in specific focus groups and workshops. A well known tech company (based in Silicon Valley) had hired our agency to help facilitate diversity training. During a focus group session, a Black senior product designer opened up about how they were feeling. At the time, the product designer said they felt a bit defeated. Their company was adamant on filling a junior role with someone Black. The product designer expressed concerns as they felt this is a role that requires months of heavy training. However, according to their supervisors, they felt what someone didn’t know could easily be taught. If the potential employee was not able to pick up the required skills in a timely manner, it would be a reflection on the Black product designer’s leadership skills.
	There are many systemic barriers that contribute to the lack of growth for Black professionals in senior tech roles. Barriers such as having limited access to mentorship programs, computer science education, and networking opportunities disproportionately affects Black employees. The lack of support perpetuates the main issue often told by companies as a reason for underrepresentation. Systemic inequities create fewer opportunities for Black employees to gain the skills and experience necessary for senior positions.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) published a report showing the growth in diversity from 2014-2022. Since 2014, there was an increase where workers of color occupied 32.4 percent of tech roles. However, Black tech workers were still underrepresented, where Black workers represented only 7.4 percent of senior workers. This is a tiny increase from the 6.9 percent in 2014, despite making up 11.6 percent of the total U.S. workforce. In addition, Black employees in senior roles have reported issues such as implicit bias and being held to higher standards than their peers, further alienating them from their work environments and hindering their career growth. These examples show the challenges around the intersection between Black identity and career progression in technology, highlighting the need for structural changes.
 Closing the gap means making changes to education, recruiting, and retention initiatives. Companies need to focus on social-minded approaches that help promote equity and provide support for Black professionals. For instance, consider talent development programs that provide access to mentorship, career growth opportunities, and technical training. Google made a commitment to better diversity practices by creating a program called, Grow with Google Career Certificates. The program provides support for  people from communities that don’t always have easy access to learn the skills they need to succeed. These kinds of programs are great for entry-level candidates or those who don’t have a traditional tech background, giving folks an opportunity to grow their skills and move up in their careers.
Another solution is for companies to build strategic initiatives that are sustainable for Black professionals. Companies such as Microsoft and organizations like Black Girls Code have partnered with historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) by teaching students about technology in hopes that these students can land internships or possible job opportunities upon graduation completion. This also helps alleviate the high turnover rate, as by working with schools, companies can stay consistent by bringing in a talent pool of Black professionals, not just hire a few people here and there. 
In addition, companies need to hold themselves accountable if they value real change and racial equity in the workplace. Salesforce, a software application company, set specific goals for hiring diverse leaders and has been open about their progress. The company also pairs Black employees with senior mentors to help them build connections and gain experience. It's important that companies teach their leaders about diversity, equity, and inclusion so they can make better business decisions and understand their own conscious/unconscious biases. By setting diversity goals, offering mentorship, and by tracking professional progress, companies like Salesforce are making sure their efforts go beyond just words and truly help change company culture. 
Overall, the need to address the lack of black representation, along with combating tokenism, both require a well-thought-out social justice-oriented strategy. It is much more than hiring more Black professionals to fill vacant roles. It is about creating sustainable and equitable pathways to leadership through investment in talent development programs, partnerships with educational institutions, and ongoing mentorship opportunities. Companies should also hold themselves accountable by providing leadership training around diversity that is not just performative. If employees are able to hold the company they work for accountable (by setting measurable goals and creating networks of support), organizations can help Black professionals overcome systemic barriers to reaching senior positions in tech. Ultimately, these actions promote intersectionality in tech, ensuring that Black professionals can succeed in leadership roles. The goal is to help dismantle the lack of equitable solutions that have long existed in the tech industry. Hopefully, the tech industry can move toward a more equitable representation and create environments where Black professionals can succeed.

---

## REFERENCES

1. Brown, J.S. Finney, M. McMillan, M. Perkins, B. (2021). [How to close the Black tech talent gap]. McKinsey & Company. (https://www.mckinsey.com/bem/our-insights/how-to-close-the-black-tech-talent-gap) 

2. U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (2022). [High tech, low inclusion: Diversity in high tech workforce and sector (2014-2022)]. U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. (https://www.eeoc.gov/special-report/high-tech-low-inclusion-diversity-high-tech-workforce-and-sector-2014-2022#iii-findings-of-prior-reports-on-growth-and-diversity-in-the-high-tech-sector) 

3. Brophy, A. (2024). [Google and Community College of Philadelphia prepare students for today’s workforce]. Google. (https://blog.google/outreach-initiatives/grow-with-google/google-career-certificates-philadelphia-students/)

4. Gasmen, M. (2024). [How To Accelerate The Future Of Innovation At HBCUs]. Forbes. (https://www.forbes.com/sites/marybethgasman/2024/08/20/how-to-accelerate-the-future-of-innovation-at-hbcus/)
